



regext                                                         J. Galvin
Internet-Draft                                          Identity Digital
Intended status: Standards Track                              M. Bauland
Expires: 8 May 2026                  Knipp Medien und Kommunikation GmbH
                                                         4 November 2025


                  Domain Related Group Support for EPP
                draft-galvin-regext-epp-variants-latest

Abstract

   This document defines an EPP extension allowing clients to learn
   about and manipulate related groups of domains, ie. groups of domains
   whose names are equivalent in a registry-defined way and are tied to
   a single registrant.

Discussion Venues

   This note is to be removed before publishing as an RFC.

   Discussion of this document takes place on the Registration Protocols
   Extensions Working Group mailing list (regext@ietf.org), which is
   archived at https://mailarchive.ietf.org/arch/browse/regext/.

   Source for this draft and an issue tracker can be found at
   https://github.com/arnt/regext-epp-variants.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 8 May 2026.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2025 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.  Code Components
   extracted from this document must include Revised BSD License text as
   described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are
   provided without warranty as described in the Revised BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction
   2.  Requirements Language
   3.  Terms
   4.  Architectural Principles
     4.1.  Backwards Compatibility
     4.2.  Same-Entity Management
     4.3.  Related Groups as a Set
   5.  Technical Principles
   6.  EPP Commands
     6.1.  EPP <check> command
     6.2.  EPP <info> command
     6.3.  EPP <transfer> command
     6.4.  EPP <create> command
     6.5.  EPP <update> command
     6.6.  EPP <delete> command
     6.7.  EPP renew command
     6.8.  EPP <transfer> query command
   7.  Result codes
   8.  Acknowledgements
   9.  Security Considerations
   10. IANA Considerations
   11. References
     11.1.  Normative References
     11.2.  Informative References
   Appendix A.  Open issues
   Authors' Addresses

1.  Introduction

   EPP is defined in [RFC5730].  EPP commands were developed to operate
   on a single object at a time.  This document defines an EPP extension
   allowing clients to learn about and manipulate related groups of
   objects that have a characteristic that makes them equivalent.

   Similar to EPP, the principal motivation for this extension was to
   provide a standard Internet domain name registration extension for
   use between domain name registrars and domain name registries.  This
   protocol provides a means of interaction between a registrar's
   applications and registry applications.  It is expected that this
   protocol will have additional uses beyond domain name registration.

   As an example, the problem being considered is that spelling is not
   necessarily uniform.  For example, an è and an e may be regarded as
   equivalent in some languages, and as different in others.

   Some registries plan to support this explicitly, with groups of
   domains that can only be registered by the same registrant.  Having
   the same registrant is most commonly considered essential for
   equivalence, since if the domains are intended to be equivalent then
   the responsibility of maintaining that equivalence must be present.
   This is a specific example of the more general "Same Entity
   Principle", which in this specification is defined to mean that a
   related group MUST be created, managed, and deleted by the same
   entity.  From a registry perspective the same entity would be a
   registrar; from the registrar's perspective the same entity would be
   the registrant.

   This document does define what makes the domains in a related group
   equivalent.  A registry policy MUST exist that specifies both that a
   registry supports related groups and that defines what domains are
   eligible to be a member of a related group.  This policy MUST be
   agreed between a registry and a registrar.  The policy and the
   establishment of the agreement is outside the scope of this
   specification.

   A common policy expression among domain registries and registrars is
   to define a related group in terms of the script or language in use
   for an Internalized Domain Name (IDN).  IDN variants can arise when
   different characters or sequences of characters in an IDN are
   considered equivalent in a particular language or script.  Standard
   Label Generation Rules (LGRs) are used to specify the IDN table that
   establishes the variant relationships.  This common policy expression
   is presumed and used as an example in this specification.

   With this extension, registering a domain creates a related group and
   the first domain registered in the group becomes the group's Primary
   Domain.  The creation of the Primary Domain MAY establish rules or
   guidelines regarding the domains that are eligible to be a member of
   the group, e.g., an LGR, an IDN table, and a Primary Domain taken
   together will define a variant group.

   Subsequent domains in the same group can only be registered by the
   same registrar, which asserts that it is acting on behalf of the same
   registrant.  Each domain in a related group may be the target of any
   EPP command, with the following restrictions.

   *  A <transfer> of any domain in any related group always acts on the
      entire group.  This is required to ensure that the related group
      is always registered by the same registrant and managed via the
      same registrar.  Registry policy MAY impose additional
      restrictions.

   *  The <delete> of a Primary Domain in any variant group always acts
      on the entire group.  This is required to support the option where
      the Primary Domain establishes the rules or guidelines for the
      creation of other domains in the group.

   This extension is backwards compatible with registrars that do not
   support related groups.  Specifically, this extension supports
   registries that do support related groups interacting with registrars
   that do not support related groups.  Registrars that do not support
   related group that attempt to act on a member of a related group
   inappropriately will receive a compatible error response with which
   they can continue to function.  The compatible error response may not
   provide sufficient detail to fully understand the rejection but will
   be sufficient to ensure continuation of normal operations.

   The remainder of this document describes the specific details.

   *TODO*: login exchange of variant-aware

   *TODO*: discussion of reference to EPP Extensibility and Extension
   Analysis https://docs.google.com/document/
   d/1WR00oB43XZCDqD0zvRvRajuWAq_9wQ3c0RrFKlGC3So/edit?tab=t.0

2.  Requirements Language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
   "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in
   BCP 14 [RFC2119] [RFC8174] when, and only when, they appear in all
   capitals, as shown here.

3.  Terms

   Allocated Member: A domain that has been created in the registry, and
   which is related to an existing Primary Domain.

   Allocatable Member: A domain that has not been allocated but is
   allocatable (e.g., according to a LGR in the case of an IDN variant),
   and which is conceptually related to an existing Primary Domain.

   Activated Member: An Allocated Member domain that is in the DNS.

   Blocked domain: A domain that cannot be allocated due to its status
   value in relation to the Primary Domain name.

   Exempted domain: A preexisting domain that exists as a stand-alone
   domain prior to the introduction of support for related groups and
   would be part of a related group if it were allocated now.  Exempted
   domains may exist with any registrant at any registrar.  The
   exemption ends in one of two ways.

   *  When there is at most 1 allocated domain remaining at which time
      the registry MUST block all other labels of the related group
      until the registrar asserts knowledge of the related group.

   *  When the registrar asserts knowledge of the related group and, if
      present brings all labels in the related group together.

   IDN Table: The combined information about what characters (code
   points) are available for domain registration as well as the variant
   relationships between those code points.  IDN tables can be defined
   via RFC3743 or RFC4290 or LGRs (RFC7940).  The latter one SHOULD be
   used as it also allows the formal definition of context rules, which
   is lacking in the former ones.

   Label Generation Rules (LGR): The preferred way of defining IDN
   tables.  Among others, they define the variant relationships as well
   as their disposition values (blocked or allocatable).  The formal
   definition of LGRs can be fond in RFC7940.  Status Value is the
   generic term in this specification to which the IDN disposition value
   would be assigned.

   Primary Domain: The chronologically first domain in a related group.
   While the related group relationship is symmetric, the status value
   of its members is not.  It can either be blocked or allocatable.  The
   Primary Domain name therefore partitions the related group into
   allocatable members and blocked members.  In the case of a related
   group of TLDs, there can be a primary domain per TLD.

   Related Domain: A domain in a related group which is not a Primary
   Domain.

   Related Group: An implicit set of domains defined by a policy set by
   a registry.  The related domain relationship is symmetric and
   transitive.  Hence, an arbitrary element of a related group defines
   the whole group.  The group is not expressed explicitly in EPP,
   because it can be impractically large.  At the time of writing, an
   IDN domain is registered whose variant set would contain 10¹⁵
   variants.

   Same Entity Principle: A requirement that all domains within a
   related group either belong to the same entity (i.e., the same
   registrant via the same registrar) or are withheld for that entity.
   No other entity is allowed to activate any domain within the same
   related group.

   Status Value: While a related group relationship is symmetric, a
   group member has exactly one of two status values which are not
   necessarily symmetric.  A member can be "allocatable" (i.e.,
   available for the same entity) or "blocked" (i.e., not available for
   anybody).

4.  Architectural Principles

   There are three principles REQUIRED to be true at all times when this
   extension is in use.  There MUST NOT be any exceptions at any time.

4.1.  Backwards Compatibility

   Support for Related Groups is optional and therefore it is REQUIRED
   that a registry supporting Related Groups MUST be backwards
   compatible with a registrar that does not support Related Groups.
   Backwards compatibility is defined to mean that a registrar will
   receive a response that is fail-safe but the registrar may not be
   able to fully understand the reason for the rejection.

   A registry that does not support related groups will behave normally
   when interacting with a registrar that supports related groups.

4.2.  Same-Entity Management

   Domains defined to be eligible to be in a related group MUST be
   managed by the same entity.  This has three requirements.

   1.  Registrars MUST ensure that domains in a related group are
       managed by the same registrant.

   2.  Registries MUST ensure that domains in a related group are
       managed by the same registrar.

   3.  A registry that is a member of a related group MUST manage all
       registries in the group.

4.3.  Related Groups as a Set

   Most EPP commands may be executed independently on any member of the
   related group.  However, commands that change the membership or
   status of members in a related group, or change the Same-Entity
   Management requirement, MUST operate on the related group as a set.

   As explained in detail in later sections, there are currently two
   commands with explicit requirements as of the time of publication of
   this document.

5.  Technical Principles

   The following technical principles have guided the developed of this
   extension and established operational requirements.

   *  The members of a related group are defined by registry policy and
      that policy must be agreed by both the registry and the registrar.
      The establishment of this policy and the method by which the
      parties agree is outside the scope of this specification.

      The first iteration of this work focused on IDN variants, which
      have the advantage that there is a relatively formal process for
      defining the eligible elements of a group.  However, Latin
      characters with diacritic marks are not always considered variants
      of Latin characters without diacritic marks and there are
      circumstances when it is desirable for them to be considerated
      equivalent.  As a result this extension presumes the existence of
      a group and sets outside its scope the actual definition of the
      group.

   *  The registry policy MUST define the properties of a Related Group,
      which MUST include at least the following properties.

      -  If the related group exists in a registry that itself is a
         member of a related group, then all related groups in any
         registry in the registry's related group MUST have the same
         members in all registries in the registry related group.

         This principle derives directly from the Same-Entity
         requirement.

         In the case of IDNs, the LGR tables may be different in each
         registry but the tables MUST be harmonized.

      -  The first domain created in a related group is designated the
         Primary Domain.

         If the registry of the related group is itself a member of a
         related group, the Primary Domain in a related group MAY be
         different in each registry.

      -  The Primary Domain has at least two REQUIRED functions.  First,
         it defines the members of the Related Group.  Second, it
         defines the status values of the members of the Related Group.

   *  EPP today implicitly defines two status values for any domain:
      registered and available.  This related group extensions adds the
      following status values.

      The Allocated status means that the member of the group is active
      in the registry.  It may or may not be delegated in the DNS.

      The Allocatable status means that the member of the group is
      available to be allocated by the same-entity.

      The Blocked status means that the member of the group is not
      available to be allocated by anyone.

   *  The creation of a Primary Domain establishes the implicit
      existence of all members of the Related Group.  If the registry of
      the related group is itself a member of a related group, the
      related group is implicitly created in all registries in the
      related group of the registry.

6.  EPP Commands

   In this section, the behavior of each EPP command when Related Groups
   are supported is specified.

6.1.  EPP <check> command

   The <check> command always acts on the target domain in the command.
   There is no change on the client side when using the <check> command.

   When the server receives a <check> command from a group-agnostic
   client and the target domain is or could be a member of a related
   group, if that related group has at least one Allocated or Exempted
   member, the server's response:

   *  MUST NOT include the <extension> element.

   *  MUST indicate 'availabe = "false"'.

   *  MAY indicate a reason of "Unavailable (except as member of
      group)".

   What the server receive a <check> command from a group-aware client
   and the target domain is or could be a member of a related group, if
   that related group has at least one Allocated or Exempted member, the
   server's response MUST contain an <extension> element with the
   following child elements:

   *  A <var:primary> element matching the Primary Domain for the
      related group.

   *  A <var:status> element, which explains in more detail the
      availability status of the queried domain.

   The EPP <check> command may return six new results:

   *  AllocatableVariant: A variant of the domain is already active.
      Provisioning of this domain must be to the same registrant via the
      same registrar.

   *  NotSameEntity: The domain cannot be provisioned because it is a
      variant of a Primary Domain, and the Primary Domain belongs to a
      different client

   *  Blocked: The domain cannot be provisioned because its disposition
      value is blocked.

   *  Exempted: The domain cannot be provisioned because it is a variant
      of at least one exempted domain.

   *  PendingTransfer: The domain cannot be provisioned because it is a
      variant in a group that is currently being transferred to a
      different registrar.

   *  Custom: Additional custom value that may be used for server
      peculiarities.

6.2.  EPP <info> command

   The <info> command always acts on the target domain in the command.
   There is no change on the client side when using the <info> command.

   The main part of the response MUST contain the actual data of the
   target domain name (contacts, hosts, status values, etc.).

   When the server receives an <info> command from a group-agnostic
   client the response MUST contain the actual data of the domain,
   independent of whether it is a member of a related group.  In
   addition, if the group-agnostic registrar is inquiring about a domain
   with a status of Allocatable, the response SHOULD be the same as if
   the client were inquiring about a reserved name.

   When the server receives an <info> command from a group-aware client
   and the target domain is or could be a member of a related group, if
   that related group has at least one Allocated or Exempted member, the
   server's response MUST contain an <extension> element with the
   following child elements:

   *  A <var:primary> element matching the Primary Domain for the
      related group of the target domain, which MAY match the target
      domain.

   *  A list of all the Allocated and Exempted members of the related
      group.

   If the registry of the target domain is itself a member of a related
   group and the target domain is or could be a member of a related
   group in any registry in that registry's related group, if any one of
   those target domain related groups has at least one Allocated or
   Exempted member, the server's response MUST contain an <extension>
   element with the following child elements:

   *  A <var:primary> element matching the Primary Domain for the
      related group of the target domain, which MAY match the target
      domain.

   *  A list of all the related groups of the target domain with
      Allocated or Exempted members such that each related group list
      has its Primary Domain listed first.

6.3.  EPP <transfer> command

   The <transfer> command always acts on the target domain in the
   command.  The use of the <transfer> command is extended if both the
   server and the client support related groups.

   When the server receives a <transfer> command from a group-agnostic
   client and the target domain is or could be a member of a related
   group, if that related group has at least one Allocated or Exempted
   member the transfer request MUST be denied using 2305 "Object status
   prohibits operation".

   When the server receives a <transfer> command from a group-aware
   client and the target domain is or could be a member of a related
   group, the request must include an <extension> element with a
   <var:primary> element matching the Primary Domain, including if the
   Primary Domain is the target domain.  If the extension is not present
   the transfer request MUST be denied using '2003 "Required parameter
   missing"'.  Note that the <check> or <info> command MAY be used to
   identify the Primary Domain.

   A valid transfer request MUST apply to all members of a related
   group.  If the registry of the target domain is itself a member of a
   related group, then the transfer request MUST apply to all related
   groups in all registries of the registry's related group.

   The server's response to the transfer request MUST contain an
   <extension> element with the following child elements;

   *  A <var:primary> element matching the Primary Domain for the
      related group of the target domain, which MAY match the target
      domain.

   *  A list of all the Allocated and Exempted members of the related
      group.

   If the registry of the target domain is itself a member of a related
   group and the target domain is or could be a member of a related
   group in any registry in that registry's related group, if any one of
   those target domain related groups has at least one Allocated or
   Exempted member, the server's response MUST contain an <extension>
   element with the following child elements:

   *  A <var:primary> element matching the Primary Domain for the
      related group of the target domain, which MAY match the target
      domain.

   *  A list of all the related groups of the target domain with
      Allocated or Exempted members such that each related group list
      has its Primary Domain listed first.

   *TODO*: It must be ensured that the poll message to the losing
   registrar also contains the full list of domains that will be
   transferred together with the primary domain.

6.4.  EPP <create> command

   The EPP <create> command's standard task is to provision a new
   domain.  When related groups are supported, the <create> command MUST
   be used to create the Primary Domain and MUST NOT be used to
   provision any other member of the Primary Domain's related group.
   The task of converting an allocatable domain into an allocated domain
   MUST be performed using the <update> command.

   When the server receives a <create> command from a group-agnostic
   client and the target domain is or could be a member of a related
   group, one of the following actions MUST be completed as appropriate.

   *  If any member of the related group is currently Allocated or
      Exempted, the command MUST be rejected and the response should be
      the same as if the domain to be created is reserved.

   *  If there are no members of the related group either Allocated or
      Exempted, the <create> MUST proceed according to the standard with
      the server implicitly reserving all other members of the related
      group such that they MUST NOT be allocated until such time as the
      client is group-aware and the client MUST indicate that the target
      domain is to be extended to be a Primary Domain as described in
      the <update> command.

   When the server receives a <create> command from a group-aware client
   and the target domain is or could be a member of a related group, the
   command MUST include an <extension> element with the <var:primary>
   child element that must match the target domain.  If not, the command
   MUST be rejected using '2003 "Required parameter missing"'.

   Upon receiving a <create> command from a group-aware client with a
   valid <extension> element, one of the following actions MUST be
   completed as appropriate.

   *  If the target domain does not exist and any other member of the
      related group is Allocated or Exempted, the command MUST be
      rejected and indicate that it is an inappropriate use of the
      command.

   *  If the target domain does not exist and no other member of the
      related group is Allocated or Exempted, the <create> command MUST
      proceed according to the standard with the server implicitly
      noting to itself the existence of all other members of the related
      group and setting their status value as prescribed by registry
      policy.  The response MUST include the <extension> element with
      the <var:primary> child element indicating the Primary Domain,
      which must match the target domain.

   *  If the target domain does exist, the <create> command MUST be
      rejected according to the standard.  The response MUST include the
      <extension> element with the <var:primary> child element
      indicating the Primary Domain, which must match the target domain.

   The EPP <create> command may have five new errors, as described in
   the <check> section above.

   *TODO*: check alignment of the new error codes

6.5.  EPP <update> command

   The EPP <update>gt; command provides a transform operation that
   allows a client to change the state of a related domain object.  It
   is extended to cover three new tasks:

   *  Activating an allocatable related domain in an existing related
      group.

   *  Deactivating an activated related domain name in an existing
      related group.

   *  Converting an Allocated or Exempted Domain into a Primary Domain
      and optionally converting other Exempted Domains that are eligible
      to be in the related group of the stated Primary Domain to be
      activated domains of the related group.

   This extended <update> command is not valid for use by a group-
   agnostic client.  Any use by a group-agnostic client MUST be rejected
   and indicate it is an inappropriate use of the command.

   A group-agnostic client MUST only use the standard-defined <update>
   command and the server MUST only respond as defined by the standard.

   The rest of this section specifies behavior when group-aware servers
   and group-aware clients are interacting and describes the three new
   tasks.

   When the target domain of the update command is any member of the
   related group, including the Primary Domain of the related group, the
   client MUST include an <extension> element that MUST include at least
   the <var:primary> child element indicating the Primary Domain of the
   corresponding related group.  The extension MAY include additional
   elements as indicated below to provision a new task.  If the
   extension is not present the command MUST be rejected and indicate
   that a required parameter is missing.

   If the Primary Domain and the target domain match, all other elements
   in the extension MUST be ignored and the update command MUST be
   processed as a standard defined update command acting on the Primary
   Domain.

   The rest of this section specifies behavior when the target domain
   and the Primary Domain indicated in the extension do not match.

   If the <var:status> child element is present in the extension, one of
   the following actions MUST be completed as appropriate.

   *  In order to Activate an Allocatable domain, the target domain MUST
      have a status of Allocatable and the extension MUST include the
      <var:status> child element with a value of "allocated".  The
      server MUST update the status of the target domain and the
      response MUST include the extension element with both the Primary
      Domain indicated and the revised status indicated.

   *  In order to deactivate an Allocated domain, the target domain MUST
      have a status of Allocated and the extension MUST include the
      <var:status> child element with a value of "allocatable".  The
      server MUST update the status of the target domain and the
      response MUST include the extension element with both the Primary
      Domain indicated and the revised status indicated.

   *  In all other cases, if the status element is present the command
      MUST be rejected and indicate an invalid parameter is present.

   If the <var:status> child element is not present in the extension,
   then all elements other than the Primary Domain indication MUST be
   ignored and the update command MUST be processed as a standard
   defined update command acting on the target domain.

   Note that depending on registry policy, the related domain may share
   attributes with the Primary Domain, e.g., nameservers.  A registry
   policy MAY specify rules or guidelines for the set of elements
   required or permitted for a related domain according to the Primary
   Domain.

   The EPP domain mapping from RFC3915 describes the elements that have
   to be specified within an <update>gt; command.  The requirement to
   provide at least one <domain:add>gt;, <domain:rem>gt;, or
   <domain:chg>gt; element is updated by this extension such that at
   least one empty <domain:add>gt;, <domain:rem>gt;, or <domain:chg>gt;
   element MUST be present if this extension is specified within an
   <update>gt; command.  This requirement is updated to disallow the
   possibility of modifying a domain object as part of the deactivation.

   If a client wishes to convert an Exempted domain into the Primary
   Domain of a related group, the update command from the client MUST be
   provided as follows.

   *  The target domain of the update command and the Primary Domain in
      the extension MUST match.

   *  The target domain MUST have the status of Exempted.

   *  If there exists multiple Exempted domains that would ordinarily be
      members of the related group, they MUST all have the same
      Registrar of Record and it MUST match the update requesting
      registrar, and the extension MUST include a list of all Exempted
      domains, including the Primary Domain, that MUST match the list
      maintained by the registry.

   If the update command is valid as indicated above, the server MUST
   change the status of the indicated domains from Exempted to
   Allocated, and MUST indicate the Primary Domain.  The response MUST
   include an extension indicating the Primary Domain and the list of
   domains whose status changed from Exempte to Allocated.

   If a previously group-agnostic client becomes group-aware and wishes
   to convert a registered domain to be a Primary Domain of related
   group, the update command from the client MUST be provided as
   follows.

   *  The target domain of the update command and the Primary Domain in
      the extension MUST match.

   *  The target domain MUST have the status of registered and MUST have
      the same Registrar of Record as the update requesting registrar.

   If the update command is valid as indicated above, the server MUST
   change the status of the indicated domains to Allocated, and MUST
   indicate it as the Primary Domain.  The response MUST include an
   extension indicating the Primary Domain.

6.6.  EPP <delete> command

   The <delete> command is extended to REQUIRE the deletion of all
   members of a related group if the Primary Domain is deleted.

   This extended <delete> command is not valid for use by a group-
   agnostic client.  Any use by a group-agnostic client MUST be rejected
   and indicate it is an inappropriate use of the command.

   A group-agnostic client MUST only use the standard-defined <update>
   command and the server MUST only respond as defined by the standard.

   The rest of this section specifies behavior when group-aware servers
   and group-aware clients are interacting.

   A group-aware client MUST NOT use the <delete> command to delete any
   member of a related group except the Primary Domain.  Any other use
   MUST be rejected and indicate it is an inappropriate use of the
   command.  Note that <update> command is used for this purpose.

   When the server receives a <delete> command from a group-aware
   client, the command MUST include the <extension> element which MUST
   include the <var:primary> child element which MUST match the target
   domain name.

   The delete command is extended such that all Allocated members of the
   related group defined by the Primary Domain MUST all be deleted at
   once.  If it is not possible for any member of the related group to
   be deleted for any reason, the delete command MUST fail leaving all
   members of the related group intact.

   If the delete command is successful, the response MUST include the
   extension element which MUST include both an indication of the
   Primary Domain and the list of all members of the related group that
   were deleted, including the Primary Domain.

6.7.  EPP renew command

   The EPP renew command is not extended.

   The server MAY reject renewals while a related group is being
   transferred.

6.8.  EPP <transfer> query command

   The EPP <transfer> query command is not extended.

   Note that because related groups are transferred as a group, the
   result of the a <transfer> query command is necessarily the same for
   all domains in a group.  Therefore, the result of a <transfer> query
   command for any domain in a related group applies to all domains in
   the group.

7.  Result codes

   The following additional result codes are defined:

   23x1: Change impossible because of a transfer in progress.

   23x2: Change impossible because something is not a variant.

   This error code is used when a change presupposes that two domains
   belong to the same variant group, but the EPP server's implementation
   disagrees.

   23x3: Change impossible due to invalid primary domain

   This error code is used when the primary domain specified in the
   command is not registered, or is not registered via this registrar.

   23x4: Change impossible due to unspecified primary domain

   This error code is used when a command needs to specify a primary
   domain, and does not.

   23x5: Specified domain is exempted

   This error code is used when a domain specifies a primary domain, and
   the change is impossible because the specified domain is exempted
   instead.

   23x6: Specified domain is allocatable, but not by you.

   This result code is used when a domain is a member of a variant set,
   and the command did not refer to the primary domain.

8.  Acknowledgements

   The design of this extension is almost completely based on work done
   by and decisions made by the [EPDP] committee, which was reviewed by
   a small technical design team chaired by James Galvin.  Members of
   this team included Dennis Tan, Rick Wilhelm, Edmon Chung, and
   Jennifer Chung.  This text (in RFC format) was initially written by
   Arnt Gulbrandsen based on a conference presentation by James Galvin.

   YOU YES YOU (<- insert name) have reviewed it and provided helpful
   comments or contributed in other ways.

9.  Security Considerations

   If two domains are different according to the DNS rules and identical
   in the eyes of the intended audience, then the audience may be
   confused.  Confusion can always have security-related effects.

   This extension expresses the relationships between variants clearly,
   making it a little more difficult for a would-be impersonator to
   register a variant of another registrant's existing domain.

10.  IANA Considerations

11.  References

11.1.  Normative References

   [RFC5730]  Hollenbeck, S., "Extensible Provisioning Protocol (EPP)",
              STD 69, RFC 5730, DOI 10.17487/RFC5730, August 2009,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc5730>.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc2119>.

   [RFC8174]  Leiba, B., "Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in RFC
              2119 Key Words", BCP 14, RFC 8174, DOI 10.17487/RFC8174,
              May 2017, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8174>.

11.2.  Informative References

   [RFC7940]  Davies, K. and A. Freytag, "Representing Label Generation
              Rulesets Using XML", RFC 7940, DOI 10.17487/RFC7940,
              August 2016, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc7940>.

   [EPDP]     ICANN, "Phase 2 Initial Report of the EPDP on
              Internationalized Domain Names", 2024,
              <https://www.icann.org/en/public-comment/proceeding/phase-
              2-initial-report-of-the-epdp-on-internationalized-domain-
              names-11-04-2024>.

Appendix A.  Open issues

   Open issue: Assign numbers to the error codes, properly.

   Open issue: Not clear that there are any security considerations here
   — the relationships between the domains may have some, but those
   exist outside EPP, EPP merely describes them.  In Italian, caffe and
   caffè are variants of the same thing, it's not clear that linking
   them in a protocol affects security in any way.

   Open issue: Check how to insert a DS record in a variant domain.

   Open issue: Can a unicode upgrade cause domains to become exempted?
   Yes, I think, and the terminology covers it, but as of now, it's
   difficult for the EPP client to understand the situation.  Extending
   the <info> command would help here, perhaps.

   Open issue: <Delete> now cascades and deletes many domains.  Should
   it instead turn any variant domains into exempted domains?

Authors' Addresses

   James Galvin
   Identity Digital
   Bellevue, Washington,
   United States of America
   Email: jgalvin@identity.digital


   Michael Bauland
   Knipp Medien und Kommunikation GmbH
   Dortmund
   Germany
   Email: michael.bauland@knipp.de
